pnpm deep dive (#1420)
seek-oss/skuba: docs/deep-dives/pnpm.md

---
parent: Deep dives
---

# pnpm

---

pnpm is the recommended package manager of choice for projects at SEEK.

This topic details how to use pnpm with **skuba**.

---

## Background

> **skuba** simply serves a wrapper for numerous developer packages such as TypeScript, Jest, Prettier & Eslint and abstracts the dependency management of those packages across all of our repos at SEEK. This means that when you are using skuba, you do not need to declare these packages as devDependencies. In our previously recommended package manager [yarn], these packages, and others are hoisted to create a flattened dependency tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**skuba** simply serves a wrapper for numerous developer tools such as TypeScript, Jest, Prettier & ESLint,
abstracting the dependency management of those packages across SEEK projects.
This means that when you are using **skuba**,
you do not need to declare these packages as direct `devDependencies`.
In our previously-recommended package manager, [Yarn], these packages and others are automatically hoisted to create a flattened dependency tree.
```

```json
{
  "devDependencies": {
    "skuba": "7.2.0"
  }
}
```

```
node_modules
├── jest
├── prettier
├── skuba

> └── other-skuba-deps

Reviewer: 🤩

```

However, this behaviour can lead to some [silly bugs] when updating packages.

## pnpm in skuba

[pnpm] addresses the hoisting issue by using a [symlinked structure] which allows every package to use the version range of the package they declared as opposed to the version which may have been hoisted.

> This is a double-edged sword when it comes to using skuba, as this means that our developer dependencies such as Prettier and Eslint become nested within the skuba folder where most editor and developer tooling integrations do not know where to find it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a double-edged sword when it comes to using **skuba**,
as this means that our dependencies such as Prettier and ESLint become nested within a `node_modules/skuba` subdirectory,
where most editor and developer tooling integrations will not know to look.
```

```
node_modules
├── skuba -> ./.pnpm/skuba@7.2.0
└── .pnpm
    ├── skuba@7.2.0
    │   └── node_modules
    │       └── prettier -> ../../prettier@3.0.0
    └── prettier@3.0.0
        └── node_modules
            └── other-dep -> <store>/other-dep
```

> #### .npmrc
> 
> pnpm allows us to specify dependencies to hoist via command line or via a [.npmrc] file. However, the number of package patterns we need to hoist may fluctuate so specifying the hoist patterns via command line was going to be too difficult to maintain.
> 
> The skuba maintained .npmrc file looks like and instructs all the following dependencies to be hoisted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### .npmrc

pnpm allows us to specify dependencies to hoist via command line or [`.npmrc`] file.
However, the number of package patterns we need to hoist may fluctuate,
so specifying hoist patterns via command line would be difficult to maintain.

The **skuba**-maintained `.npmrc` instructs the following dependencies to be hoisted:
```

```
# managed by skuba
public-hoist-pattern[]="@types*"
public-hoist-pattern[]="*eslint*"
public-hoist-pattern[]="*prettier*"
public-hoist-pattern[]="esbuild"
public-hoist-pattern[]="jest"
public-hoist-pattern[]="tsconfig-seek"
# end managed by skuba
```

> From the previous example, this will produce the following node_modules layout which means that our integrations will now be able to find `prettier` in node_modules/prettier like before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the previous example, this will produce the following `node_modules` layout which means that our integrations will now be able to find `prettier` in `node_modules/prettier` like before.
```

```
node_modules
├── prettier -> ./.pnpm/prettier@3.0.0
├── skuba -> ./.pnpm/skuba@7.2.0
└── .pnpm
    ├── skuba@7.2.0
    │   └── node_modules
    │       └── prettier -> ../../prettier@3.0.0
    └── prettier@3.0.0
        └── node_modules
            └── other-dep -> <store>/other-dep
```

> ## Migrating to pnpm from yarn or npm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating to pnpm from Yarn or npm
```

> 1. Install skuba 7.4.0 or greater
> 
> 2. Install pnpm
> 
>    On Mac OSX you can run the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install **skuba** 7.4.0 or greater

2. Install pnpm

   On macOS you can run the following:
```

   ```bash
   brew install pnpm
   ```

   For other operating systems you can check the [install guide].

> 3. Create [pnpm-workspace.yaml](https://pnpm.io/pnpm-workspace_yaml)
> 
>    If you are not using yarn workspaces, you can skip this step.
> 
>    ```yaml
>    packages:
>      # all packages in direct subdirs of packages/
>      - 'packages/*'
>    ```
> 
>    You can also delete the `workspaces` key in your package.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create [`pnpm-workspace.yaml`](https://pnpm.io/pnpm-workspace_yaml)

   If you are not using Yarn workspaces, you can skip this step.

   ```yaml
   packages:
     # all packages in direct subdirs of packages/
     - 'packages/*'
   ```

   You can also delete the `workspaces` key in your `package.json`.
```

4. Run [`pnpm import`]

>    This converts your `yarn.lock` or `packge-json.lock` into a `pnpm-lock.yaml` file.
> 
> 5. Delete the `yarn.lock` or `packge-json.lock` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This converts your `yarn.lock` or `package-lock.json` into a `pnpm-lock.yaml` file.

5. Delete the `yarn.lock` or `package-lock.json` file.
```

6. Run `skuba format`

>    This will create a `.npmrc` file with some managed hoist patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This will synthesise some managed hoist patterns into `.npmrc`.
```

7. Run `pnpm i`

// TODO Check your .npmrc buildkite/dockerfile for auth stuff

> [.npmrc]: https://pnpm.io/npmrc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`.npmrc`]: https://pnpm.io/npmrc
```

        └── node_modules
            └── other-dep -> <store>/other-dep
```

This presents challenges to build pipelines that synthesise an ephemeral `.npmrc` to access private SEEK packages on the npm registry.
We deal with this in the migration guide below.

## Migrating to pnpm from Yarn or npm

This migration guide assumes that you scaffolded your project with a **skuba** template.

1. Install **skuba** 7.4.0 or greater

2. Install pnpm

   On macOS you can run the following:

   ```bash
   brew install pnpm
   ```

   For other operating systems you can check the [install guide].

3. Add a `packageManager` key to your `package.json`

   ```json
   "packageManager": "pnpm@8.15.1",
   ```

4. Create [`pnpm-workspace.yaml`](https://pnpm.io/pnpm-workspace_yaml)

   Skip this step if your project does not use Yarn workspaces.

   ```yaml
   packages:
     # all packages in direct subdirs of packages/
     - 'packages/*'
   ```

5. Run [`pnpm import`]

   This converts your `yarn.lock` or `package-lock.json` into a `pnpm-lock.yaml` file.

6. Delete the `yarn.lock` or `package-lock.json` file

7. Run `skuba format`

   This will synthesise some managed hoist patterns into `.npmrc`.

> 8. Include additional hoisting settings into `.npmrc`

Reviewer 2: Should we add a note around removing the TODO it adds for you?  https://github.com/SEEK-Jobs/indie-billie-eilish/pull/773/files#diff-bc37d034bad564583790a46f19d807abfe519c5671395fd494d8cce506c42947R25-R28

      ENV NODE_ENV=production
    ```

13. Modify your `.buildkite/pipeline.yml` plugins

    As our application now contains a `.npmrc` file in our `workdir`, we now also need to also change the mount path of our auth token `.npmrc` file in our buildkite plugins. We will also be exchanging the `yarn.lock` file for `pnpm-lock.yaml`

    ```diff
      seek-oss/private-npm#v1.2.0:
        env: NPM_READ_TOKEN
    +   output-path: tmp/
    ```

    ```diff
     seek-oss/docker-ecr-cache#v2.1.0:
       cache-on:
    -    - package.json
    -    - yarn.lock
    +    - pnpm-lock.yaml
       dockerfile: Dockerfile.dev-deps
    -  secrets: id=npm,src=.npmrc
    +  secrets: id=npm,src=tmp/.npmrc
    ```

14. Modify your usages of `yarn` to `pnpm` in `.buildkite/pipeline.yml`

    ```diff
     - label: 🧪 Test & Lint
       commands:
    +    - echo '--- pnpm install --offline'
    +    - pnpm install --offline
    -    - echo '+++ yarn test:ci'
    -    - yarn test:ci
    -    - echo '--- yarn lint'
    -    - yarn lint
    +    - echo '+++ pnpm run test:ci'
    +    - pnpm run test:ci
    +    - echo '--- pnpm run lint'
    +    - pnpm run lint
    ```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe a note to contribute to this if people run into other issues?

```shell
# managed by skuba
public-hoist-pattern[]="@types*"
public-hoist-pattern[]="*eslint*"
public-hoist-pattern[]="*prettier*"
public-hoist-pattern[]="esbuild"
public-hoist-pattern[]="jest"
public-hoist-pattern[]="tsconfig-seek"
# end managed by skuba
```

From the previous example, this will produce the following `node_modules` layout,
allowing external integrations to find `prettier` in `node_modules/prettier` as before.

```console
node_modules
├── prettier -> ./.pnpm/prettier@3.0.0
├── skuba -> ./.pnpm/skuba@7.2.0
└── .pnpm
    ├── skuba@7.2.0
    │   └── node_modules
    │       └── prettier -> ../../prettier@3.0.0
    └── prettier@3.0.0
        └── node_modules
            └── other-dep -> <store>/other-dep
```

Committing pnpm configuration in `.npmrc` can conflict with build pipelines that synthesise an ephemeral `.npmrc` to access private SEEK packages on the npm registry.
A solution to this problem is detailed in the migration guide below.

---

## Migrating from Yarn 1.x to pnpm

This migration guide assumes that your project was scaffolded with a **skuba** template.

1. Install **skuba** 7.4.0 or greater

2. Install pnpm

   Run the following on macOS:

   ```bash

>    brew install pnpm

Reviewer 3: I've been using `corepack enable` https://pnpm.io/installation#using-corepack

Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: You can use in docker images too

Reviewer 2: Not ignoring the feedback, but we might workshop this in another PR if sam's happy with the feedback as I want to get this out as a first pass alongside the release

Author: Did you have `corepack` on your computer by default?

I was using `volta` and `fnm` and it didn't seem to install it for me by default, so I figured instead of `brew install corepack` followed by `corepack enable pnpm`, `brew install pnpm` would be easier?

Reviewer 3: Sorry, yeah I'm pretty sure I had corepack already. It's not in my `brew ls`. I use `nvm` as my node manager and corepack has been in node since node 16 i think.
